Dfinity comparison (#109)
w3f/polkadot-wiki: docs/learn-comparison-dfinity.md

---
id: learn-comparisons-dfinity
title: Dfinity and Polkadot
sidebar_label: Dfinity
---

Dfinity calls itself "the internet computer" and positions itself as a sister project to Ethereum. Dfinity has been

> in development since 2016, with a release called "Copper" supposed to come in 2017 but never seemed to have landed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in development since 2016, with a release called "Copper" supposed to have come out in 2017 but never seemed to have landed.
```

In 2019, the world has yet to see the majority of Dfinity's closed source code for their client since they only publish

> helper libraries on their GitHub. The closed source nature of development is in stark contrast to the development of

Reviewer: Link to their github?

> Polkadot, which has developed its Rust reference implementation in the open on GitHub from the start in 2017.

Reviewer: Recommend also linking to our repo.

### Algorithmic Governance

Dfinity is a strong proponent of algorithmic governance, having published
[two](https://medium.com/dfinity/the-dfinity-blockchain-nervous-system-a5dd1783288e#.duzxztt9k)
[blog](https://medium.com/dfinity/future-governance-integrating-traditional-ai-technology-into-the-blockchain-nervous-system-825ababf9d9)
posts explicitly on the topic. 

Dfinity terms its governance framework the Blockchain Nervous System (BNS). The BNS awards a neuron token to 

> participants whom deposit Dfinity's native token in a system lock. The relative voting power of the neuron is weighted by the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
participants who deposit Dfinity's native token in a system lock. The relative voting power of the neuron is weighted by the
```

amounts of Dfinity tokens held in the deposit, and the delay for withdrawing these tokens is at least three months.

> The heaviest weighted neuron of the network then is able to dictate which direction the chain will progress when proposals

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The heaviest weighted neuron of the network is then able to dictate which in direction the chain will progress when proposals
```

would otherwise create blockchain forks. If the heaviest is not available, then it tries to follow the second heaviest,

> and so on until one neuron is available to decide the fork or none are (a situation not explored in their blog post).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and so on until one neuron is available to decide the fork. The situation when none are is one not explored in their blog post.
```

Dfinity positions its algorithmic governance as "AI is Law" in a similar vein to the Szabo-influenced "Code is Law" ethos.
However, it makes this "Code is Law" statement contingent on the distributed intelligence of the blockchain nervous system.
The reliance on external decision making to enact on-chain changes is comparable to Polkadot's approach to on-chain
governance, in which the rules of participation are laid out in dry code but is ultimately dictated by the will of the

> token holders. However, the BNS seems to be a simplified reduction of governance to only deciding on chain forks through

Reviewer: ```suggestion
token holders. 

However, the BNS seems to be a simplified reduction of governance to only deciding on chain forks through
```

Reviewer: Generally, paragraphs of over 3 sentences have been proven kill attention and make readers zone out.

Author: Nice, would be interested to see the source of this factoid. I instinctively agree with this but would like to see if there's a study.

Reviewer: There were some writeups we did at SitePoint way back when: https://www.sitepoint.com/perfect-paragraph-length-even-care/, mostly based on other people's research and our own hotjar analytics on post content. I don't know of any actual studies though.

a "trust the expert" follow-the-heaviest-neuron approach. Whereas Polkadot allows governance mechanisms to be much more
fine-grained through mechanisms of conviction voting, a tri-cameral model of checks and balances, and the ability to
follow chain upgrades seamlessly without needing to update client software.

### Consensus

Dfinity uses a four-layered consensus consisting of an identity layer, a random beacon layer, a blockchain layer, and a
notary layer. 

> The identity layer handles the Proof-of-Stake registration and anti-sybil mechanism of the consensus protocol. In

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The identity layer handles the Proof-of-Stake registration and anti-Sybil mechanism of the consensus protocol. In
```

> Polkadot, we would compare the identity layer to a subset of the functional of NPoS, which handles the stake deposits and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Polkadot, we would compare the identity layer to a subset of the function of NPoS, which handles the stake deposits and
```

> sybil resistance while also acting as the peer-set selection algorithm as well. It is expected that stake deposits on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sybil resistance while also acting as the peer-set selection algorithm. It is expected that stake deposits on
```

an account makes a deposit they become a validator. Polkadot is more flexible and allows variable deposits and the
ability to act as a nominator to participate in the staking system without needing to run validator infrastructure
yourself.

The random beacon layer is used to construct a random number in Dfinity, which is the basis for the blockchain and notary
layer. It employs a verifiable random function (VRF) that is based on BLS threshold signatures and requires a distributed
key generation (DKG). The BLS threshold based VRF is able to solve the "last actor" problem in which the final participant
in the protocol can abort by predicting the randomness and not publishing it. Although Polkadot also employs a VRF in its
block production protocol BABE, it does not suffer from the "last actor" problem as it uses a different type of VRF
that generates the randomness locally, but still allows global verification. The random beacon is then taken from the VRF
outputs from two blocks prior, which can be proven to be secure.

The blockchain and fork resolution layer used in Dfinity is known as _probablistic slot protocol_ and uses the randomness

> from the random beacon to give priority to each proposer for particular block. Within a constant block time, all proposals

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from the random beacon to give priority to each proposer for a particular block. Within a constant block time, all proposals
```

by their weight, that producer will produce a new block. BABE achieves constant block time by having a fallback to the
Aura round robin style block assignment if for a particular slot no producer generated a random number that fell below
their threshold. In BABE forks can happen if more than one producer pulls a correct "lottery ticket" random number,
and in this case will rely on the chain selection rule which uses the last finalized chain from GRANDPA to build on.

Finally, in the notarization and _near-instant finality_ layer of Dfinity, the blocks which are produced in the previous
layer are notarized by the committee of validators. The notarization is a timestamp and a proof that the block has been
published to the network, which prevents a malicious validator from creating a private chain and revealing it later. The
notarization mechanism aims to solve the selfish mining attack and the nothing at stake problem. The notarized blocks
are then agreed on in a further finalization mechanism. 

One should not pay too much heed to the term _near-instant finality_ because terms like this and "instant finality" are

> basically just marketing terms for Byzantine agreement protocols, and conceal the actually capability of the finality

Reviewer: ```suggestion
basically just marketing terms for Byzantine agreement protocols, and conceal the actual capability of the finality
```
